Question number one is can you tell me your name?
What is your name?
Shamim Bashir
And where were you born?
Where were you born?
I don't know India, I don't know Pakistan
She doesn't know
I don't know my mother either, she died when she was young
My mother died when she was young, so she doesn't know she was born in India or Pakistan
That's ok
When did you arrive in the UK?
Can you tell me how life was as you arrived in the UK?
When you arrived in the UK, how was your life? How many people were there?
It was hard
Tell me how hard was it?
There was no hot room, there was no water
Cold?
Cold
There were no clothes to wear, we didn't even have a place to dry our clothes
She had kids, so we see drying the nappies were hard
When you came back, it was hard
In the winter, yeah, they get hard, you know when you put the washing out
This life is good
She said this life is better
It was very hard
Very hard
How was it harder? Was there any other problem?
Was there any other problem?
Was there any other problem with your tongue?
Yes, there was a lot
Obviously, it's the language
The doctor took her to the doctor
Obviously her husband used to take her to see the doctor
How was it like making friends?
When you were young, how did you make friends?
We didn't have any friends
No friends at that time?
We had a mother-in-law and a brother-wife
So they were family
Yeah, they were families
That's it
They were just other family members who came to UK with their families
But no other friends
My husband is coming now, 12 years old
Your uncle came first
Yeah, uncle came here, her husband came here 12 years before
So she came in 1964 but he would have come in 1952
My husband's father, long time ago
There was a fight in his birth that he was here
The father-in-law came and the German... was it the Second World War?
Second World War
Yeah, Second World War
Your grandfather, grandfather, and all of them
They were great grandfathers basically from her husband's side in-laws
They were here
Were they all in the war or were they just here before?
They were residents of the UK
They were here during... before war
Fish and chips shop
I'm just going to ask, does Auntie want to check her scarf?
You can take your scarf up
Is that okay?
If your scarf is up, you can take it up
Is that okay? It's up to you
It's up to you? You don't have to take it up if you don't want to
No, it's okay
It's okay, it's fine
Thank you
So the question is going to be
What do you remember of your culture back home? Can you explain?
They ask, when you were living in Pakistan
The culture, the traditions you had there
You tell them about that when you came there for the first time
The traditions...
How many people lived there?
There were no electricity
No electricity but it was nice
No electricity
It was like this in Pakistan
It's a different Pakistan now
But at that time there was no electricity
Big families lived together
We were not allowed to go out
She was not allowed to go out
No, we were allowed to go out
Being a woman
Burqa?
Yeah, they have to cover themselves
We call the Nikah of the Burqa
My grandfather used to tell me that
You have to go to school and study
Granddad used to say that
What's the point of studying?
At the end of the day you're just going to cook and make chapatis
So the education...
Old
Old, yeah, old thoughts
Now girls study
Now obviously the girls go for higher education
What part of that culture in India, Pakistan do you do here today?
What do you think of the things that we do in Pakistan?
Meeting families
When you do things in Pakistan
You do some things here too
Yes, we do
Various things like food, weddings, festivals
Knitting
She used to do knitting there
She used to make red cardigan over there
And then she can do that here now as well
Sewing
Nice, very nice
She used to sew, she used to do the housework
Cleaning, obviously cleaning the house
Fire
Yeah, fire, yeah
Sometimes my husband, sometimes me
When you were in Pakistan, what did you do there?
There I cut flowers
Yeah, she used to do embroidery there as well
Here you get a chance to do it
Crochet
So those kind of things are now they're doing here as well, especially as a group
They used to make big sheets
Big sheets, like bedding sheets, they'll do embroidery
Pillow cases
As she said, back then you couldn't study
Hard work
Hard work over there as well
She said it was hard work over there and it's hard work here as well
What do you like about here, Wales?
You live in Wales, right?
We live in Wales, we don't have any food in Wales
What do you like here? What do you like?
You're living here in the city for so long
We like everything
What do you like about here?
Do you like people? Do you feel safe? Anything?
I like shopping
Shopping, go for shopping
Go out with friends
Go and visit friends
Yeah
Oh yeah, because of you can have some bits, yeah, some words I know
Yeah, you can get some help from the group
Mother-in-law, I go now
Yeah, because my mother-in-law, they obviously, they are sister-in-laws
So she's passed away now
Your mother-in-law, my sister-in-law
So they used to meet a lot
Okay, so my final question is what do you like about Age Alive?
They used to ask me, what do you like about Age Alive?
When we don't meet here in the marriage church
Or sometimes here
What do you like about it when you do the exercise?
When we go to the Age Alive group
We go to the group, we talk, talk, talk
We get to see each other and be happy
You must have learned a lot from the group
When you come here to do the exercise
We talk, talk, talk, talk
Yeah, that's good
What is your final message for the future generation?
What message would you like to give to the children who are coming here?
It's worth explaining because this will go in the archive
This is a chance for people 20 years from now to hear and read
So what is the message for that future?
No one does anything bad
No theft
Stay together
Because we have come from different countries
So we should all stay together
You should respect the visitors
When the visitors come you respect them
You treat them nicely
Reading, writing, writing, making good poetry
When you are reading poetry
You want them to work here
Help the country
When the grandchildren read, they are happy
When the grandchildren come, hug, kiss
When the grandchildren come, they are happy
They give birthday gifts
When you say simple, what do you mean?
Is there anything else you would like to say on camera?
Do you want to say anything else?
Do you want to say anything?
About yourself, your group, your family
There are a lot of things in Pakistan
Sister, brother
Still obviously missing the family
When you came, it was hard
We didn't have a heater
We had hot water
We used to boil the water in the saucepan
We had to do all the work
Thank you very much
I think we leave it there
It's okay, you don't have to leave it there
No, no
No, that's fine